Reinforcement Learning Notebook (#410)
pymc-devs/pymc-examples: myst_nbs/case_studies/reinforcement_learning.myst.md

    )

    # Apply the sotfmax transformation
    Qs = Qs[:-1] * beta
    logp_actions = Qs - at.logsumexp(Qs, axis=1, keepdims=True)

    # Return the probabilities for the right action, in the original scale
    return at.exp(logp_actions[:, 1])
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 121
id: S55HgqZiTfpa
outputId: a2db2d68-8bf3-4773-8368-5b6dff310e4b
---
with pm.Model() as m_alt:
    alpha = pm.Beta(name="alpha", alpha=1, beta=1)
    beta = pm.HalfNormal(name="beta", sigma=10)

    action_probs = right_action_probs(alpha, beta, actions, rewards)
    like = pm.Bernoulli(name="like", p=action_probs, observed=actions[1:])

    tr_alt = pm.sample(random_seed=rng)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 452
id: zjXW103JiDRQ
outputId: aafc1b1e-082e-414b-cac7-0ad805097057
---
az.plot_trace(data=tr_alt);
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:id: SDJN2w117eox

az.plot_posterior(data=tr_alt, ref_val=[true_alpha, true_beta]);
```

## Watermark

```{code-cell} ipython3
%load_ext watermark
%watermark -n -u -v -iv -w -p aeppl,xarray
```

## References

:::{bibliography}
:filter: docname in docnames
:::

+++

> ## Credits

Reviewer: All the credits/authorship info should be here, not divided in two different sections in the top/bottom of the notebook respectively

Author: Thanks! Fixed in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/49b3d6b503726f242dc529e7cb3d2a15c0d2bc55

Reviewer: The section was not redundant and it should all be placed here. Some deviations are ok but notebooks should follow the jupyter style guide as closely as possible. This includes: https://docs.pymc.io/en/latest/contributing/jupyter_style.html#authorship-and-attribution

Author: Ups! Sorry, I was following one of the recent notebooks. I will bring it bak again 🙇

Author: Ok, here are all the credits together https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/61e788123690b4b205c960c819a92b126dfa17e8

ax.set_yticks([0, 1], ["left", "right"])
ax.set_ylim(-1, 2)
ax.set_ylabel("action")
ax.set_xlabel("trial")

ax.scatter(0, 20, c="k", s=50, lw=lw, label="Reward")
ax.scatter(0, 20, c="w", ec="k", s=50, lw=lw, label="No reward")
ax.plot([0, 1], [20, 20], c="k", lw=3, alpha=0.3, label="Qvalue (centered)")

handles, labels = ax.get_legend_handles_labels()
order = (1, 2, 0)
handles = [handles[idx] for idx in order]
labels = [labels[idx] for idx in order]
ax.legend(handles, labels, fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27));
```

+++ {"id": "6RNLAtqDXgG_"}

The plot above shows a simulated run of 150 trials, with parameters $\alpha = .5$ and $\beta = 5$, and constant reward probabilities of $.4$ and $.6$ for the left (blue) and right (orange) actions, respectively. 

Solid and empty dots indicate actions followed by rewards and no-rewards, respectively. The solid line shows the estimated $Q$ value for each action centered around the respective colored dots (the line is above its dots when the respective $Q$ value is above $.5$, and below otherwise). It can be seen that this value increases with rewards (solid dots) and decreases with non-rewards (empty dots). 

> The change in line height following each outcome is directly related to the $\alpha$ pamater. The influence of the $\beta$ parameter is more difficult to grasp, but one way to think about it is that the higher its value, the higher the probability of flipping between actions regardless of their estimated values. 

Reviewer 2: There's a mistake in this paragraph. The higher the `beta` the more deterministic the responses are / or the more sensitive they are to the observed rewards. I think flipping the adjective does not quite convey this information...

```suggestion
The change in line height following each outcome is directly related to the $\alpha$ parameter. The influence of the $\beta$ parameter is more difficult to grasp, but one way to think about it is that the higher its value, the more an agent will stick to the action that has the highest estimated value, even if the difference between the two is quite small. Conversely, as this value approaches zero, the agent will start picking randomly between the two actions, regardless of their estimated values.
```

Author: Thanks! I added it in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/5252c2b4d8304d20b7eb5daf2ccafdc60e229f0c (I am always hesitant to commit suggestions in jupyter notebooks 😄 )

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.7
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "Pq7u0kdRwDje"}

(reinforcement_learning)=
# Fitting a Reinforcement Learning Model to Behavioral Data with PyMC

:::{post} Aug 5, 2022
:tags: Aesara, Reinforcement Learning

> :category: advanced

Author: Added in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/053036a309e498461f25e0f6748c281334c1f706

  height: 121
id: S55HgqZiTfpa
outputId: a2db2d68-8bf3-4773-8368-5b6dff310e4b
---
with pm.Model() as m_alt:
    alpha = pm.Beta(name="alpha", alpha=1, beta=1)
    beta = pm.HalfNormal(name="beta", sigma=10)

    action_probs = right_action_probs(alpha, beta, actions, rewards)
    like = pm.Bernoulli(name="like", p=action_probs, observed=actions[1:])

    tr_alt = pm.sample(random_seed=rng)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 452
id: zjXW103JiDRQ
outputId: aafc1b1e-082e-414b-cac7-0ad805097057
---
az.plot_trace(data=tr_alt);
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:id: SDJN2w117eox

az.plot_posterior(data=tr_alt, ref_val=[true_alpha, true_beta]);
```

## Watermark

```{code-cell} ipython3
%load_ext watermark
%watermark -n -u -v -iv -w -p aeppl,xarray
```

## References

:::{bibliography}
:filter: docname in docnames
:::

+++

## Credits

* Authored by [Ricardo Vieira](https://github.com/ricardov94) in June 2022

* Adapted PyMC code from Maria Eckstein ([GitHub](https://github.com/MariaEckstein/SLCN), [PyMC Discourse](https://discourse.pymc.io/t/modeling-reinforcement-learning-of-human-participant-using-pymc3/1735))

> * Adapted MLE code from Robert Wilson and Anne Collins {cite:p}`collinswilson2019` ([GitHub](https://github.com/AnneCollins/TenSimpleRulesModeling))

Reviewer: I was thinking about making these two sub-bullet points of the first one, what do you thing?

Author: Yes! Added in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/053036a309e498461f25e0f6748c281334c1f706

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.7
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3.9.13 ('website_projects-1IZj_WTw')
  language: python
  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "Pq7u0kdRwDje"}

(reinforcement_learning)=

> # Fitting a simple Reinforcement Learning model to behavioral data with PyMC

Author: @ricardoV94 any suggestion on the title? (for now I removed the "simple" in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/69acb1f64770f06b1098e9b62114f1780f817b8d)

> # Fitting a simple Reinforcement Learning model to behavioral data with PyMC

Reviewer 2: "Fitting two action... "? Otherwise it's okay to simply leave the number out. I don't like the "Fitting a two variable ... " title

$$ Q = \begin{cases}
      .5, a = \text{left}\\
      .5, a = \text{right}
    \end{cases}
$$

When an action is chosen and a reward $r = \{0,1\}$ is observed, the estimated value of that action is updated as follows:

$$Q_{a} = Q_{a} + \alpha (r - Q_{a})$$

where $\alpha \in [0, 1]$ is a learning parameter that influences how much the value of an action is shifted towards the observed reward in each trial. Finally, the $Q$ table values are converted into action probabilities via the softmax transformation:

$$ P(a = \text{right}) = \frac{\exp(\beta Q_{\text{right}})}{\exp(\beta Q_{\text{right}}) + \exp(\beta Q_{\text{left}})}$$

where the $\beta \in (0, +\infty)$ parameter determines the level of noise in the agent choices. Larger values will be associated with more deterministic choices and smaller values with increasingly random choices.

***

### Credits
* The PyMC code was adapted from that of Maria Eckstein ([GitHub](https://github.com/MariaEckstein/SLCN), [PyMC Discourse](https://discourse.pymc.io/t/modeling-reinforcement-learning-of-human-participant-using-pymc3/1735))

> * The MLE code was adapted from that of Robert Wilson and Anne Collins {cite:p}`collinswilson2019` ([GitHub](https://github.com/AnneCollins/TenSimpleRulesModeling))

Author: ok! This is absolutely 100% Ricardo's work. I am just fixing the code style and pushing it to make it more visible via the pymc docs.

    plt.figure(figsize=(15, 5), layout="constrained")
    x = np.arange(len(actions))

    plt.plot(x, Qs[:, 0] - 0.5 + 0, c="C0", lw=3, alpha=0.3)
    plt.plot(x, Qs[:, 1] - 0.5 + 1, c="C1", lw=3, alpha=0.3)

    s = 50
    lw = 2

    cond = (actions == 0) & (rewards == 0)
    plt.scatter(x[cond], actions[cond], s=s, c="None", ec="C0", lw=lw)

    cond = (actions == 0) & (rewards == 1)
    plt.scatter(x[cond], actions[cond], s=s, c="C0", ec="C0", lw=lw)

    cond = (actions == 1) & (rewards == 0)
    plt.scatter(x[cond], actions[cond], s=s, c="None", ec="C1", lw=lw)

    cond = (actions == 1) & (rewards == 1)
    plt.scatter(x[cond], actions[cond], s=s, c="C1", ec="C1", lw=lw)

    plt.scatter(0, 20, c="k", s=s, lw=lw, label="Reward")
    plt.scatter(0, 20, c="w", ec="k", s=s, lw=lw, label="No reward")
    plt.plot([0, 1], [20, 20], c="k", lw=3, alpha=0.3, label="Qvalue (centered)")

    plt.yticks([0, 1], ["left", "right"])
    plt.ylim(-1, 2)

    plt.ylabel("action")
    plt.xlabel("trial")

    handles, labels = plt.gca().get_legend_handles_labels()
    order = (1, 2, 0)
    handles = [handles[idx] for idx in order]
    labels = [labels[idx] for idx in order]

>     plt.legend(handles, labels, fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27))

Author: Thanks for these comments! I think is a great addition to the notebook. I will add them.

>     plt.legend(handles, labels, fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27))

Author: So...I added the plot suggestion in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/69acb1f64770f06b1098e9b62114f1780f817b8d but I was not able to use `Line2D` to create the legend as you suggested so for now this is something where I would appreciate some tips.

>     plt.legend(handles, labels, fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27))

Author: Also, I was not able to hide the plot code cell. AFAIK I need to use `:tags: [hide-cell]` in the myst.md file? but then the pre-commit complains because the notebook and the `myst.md` are not consistent ... can you please give me a tip here :) ?

>     plt.legend(handles, labels, fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27))

Reviewer: > So...I added the plot suggestion in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/commit/69acb1f64770f06b1098e9b62114f1780f817b8d but I was not able to use Line2D to create the legend as you suggested so for now this is something where I would appreciate some tips.

My bad, the marker+linestyle+color string shortcut as 3rd arg is only available for plot, not for Line2D, it needs to use the keyword arguments only:

```
reward_artist = Line2D([], [], c="k", ls="none", marker="o", ms=s, mew=lw, label="Reward")
no_reward_artist = Line2D([], [], ls="none", marker="o", mfc="w", mec="k", ms=s, mew=lw, label="No reward")
Qvalue_artist = Line2D([], [], c="k", ls="-", lw=3, alpha=0.3, label="Qvalue (centered)")

ax.legend(handles=[no_reward_artist, Qvalue_artist, reward_artist], fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27));
```
> Also, I was not able to hide the plot code cell. AFAIK I need to use :tags: [hide-cell] in the myst.md file? but then the pre-commit complains because the notebook and the myst.md are not consistent ... can you please give me a tip here :) ?

One option is to edit the myst file (one of the reasons for having both myst and ipynb files is to be able to see and review such metadata, you can read https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/403#issuecomment-1193133893 if you are interested in this). But it is also possible to do from jupyter. Here you only have to do it once, so it isn't very critical which option you choose, if you had to update a lot of metadata I'd recommend editing the myst file. Overview of the options below:

* Editing myst. MyST and ipynb are synced, it is not that myst is purely an output of the jupyter notebook one. Therefore, if you have to update a lot of metadata in a notebook, I recommend making all the non-metadata changes from jupyter, then commiting that step. At this point, no format has any metadata so they are both perfectly synced, commit to make sure you don't lose anything. Then open the myst file and edit the metadata there, add the hidden cell tags, the figure captions and alt text... after that, run pre-commit which will sync the changes, this time modifying the ipynb file, and commit. The reason for the save+commit between the two is that if you edit both at the same time between syncing then the sync is broken and the only way to fix it is to lose the changes in one of the files, and also, pre-commit is tricky and runs only on staged changes, so if you run it and tries to sync the staged version it can edit the file and overwrite the unstaged one, which effectively means you lose the unstaged changes as these are the ones that are not tracked anywhere.
* Editing from jupyter. jupyter notebook, lab (and I assume vs code extension for jupyter and the like) have ways of editing the cell tags and metadata... This page explains it in more detail: https://jupyterbook.org/en/stable/content/metadata.html. However, the clicking for each cell and (in the case of metadata) having to write json instead of yaml is quite a pain in the ass, hence my recommendation to use myst if making significant metadata/tag changes.

>     plt.legend(handles, labels, fontsize=12, loc=(1.01, 0.27))

Author: Thank you very much for such detailed explanation! (Is this somewhere in the contributing guidelines?) 🚀 I think https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/cdaecc8003503bb50887670839ceb06299667d69 solved this!

Also, the plot suggestion worked perfectly!

    Qs, updates = aesara.scan(
        fn=update_Q, sequences=[actions, rewards], outputs_info=[Qs], non_sequences=[alpha]
    )

    # Apply the sotfmax transformation
    Qs = Qs[:-1] * beta
    logp_actions = Qs - at.logsumexp(Qs, axis=1, keepdims=True)

    # Return the probabilities for the right action, in the original scale
    return at.exp(logp_actions[:, 1])
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 121
id: S55HgqZiTfpa
outputId: a2db2d68-8bf3-4773-8368-5b6dff310e4b
---
with pm.Model() as m_alt:
    alpha = pm.Beta(name="alpha", alpha=1, beta=1)
    beta = pm.HalfNormal(name="beta", sigma=10)

    action_probs = right_action_probs(alpha, beta, actions, rewards)
    like = pm.Bernoulli(name="like", p=action_probs, observed=actions[1:])

    tr_alt = pm.sample(random_seed=rng)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 452
id: zjXW103JiDRQ
outputId: aafc1b1e-082e-414b-cac7-0ad805097057
---
az.plot_trace(data=tr_alt);
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:id: SDJN2w117eox

az.plot_posterior(data=tr_alt, ref_val=[true_alpha, true_beta]);
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
%load_ext watermark

> %watermark -n -u -v -iv -w -p aesara,pymc

Author: Done in https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples/pull/410/commits/69acb1f64770f06b1098e9b62114f1780f817b8d
